[[lifecycle_and_environment]]
=== Lifecycle and Environment

By default a single instance of each provider class is instantiated for
each JAX-RS application. First the constructor (see
<<provider_class_constructor>>) is called, then any requested dependencies
are injected (see Chapter <<context>>), then the appropriate provider
methods may be called multiple times (simultaneously), and finally the
object is made available for garbage collection.
<<providercontext>> describes how a provider obtains access to other
providers via dependency injection.

An implementation MAY offer other provider lifecycles, mechanisms for
specifying these are outside the scope of this specification. E.g. an
implementation based on an inversion-of-control framework may support
all of the lifecycle options provided by that framework.

[[automatic_discovery]]
==== Automatic Discovery

The annotation `@Provider` is used by a JAX-RS runtime to automatically
discover provider classes via mechanisms such as class scanning. A
JAX-RS implementation that supports automatic discovery of classes MUST
process only those classes that are annotated with `@Provider`.

[[provider_class_constructor]]
==== Constructors

Provider classes that are instantiated by the JAX-RS runtime and MUST
have a public constructor for which the JAX-RS runtime can provide all
parameter values. Note that a zero argument constructor is permissible
under this rule.

A public constructor MAY include parameters annotated with
`@Context`—Chapter <<context>> defines the parameter types permitted for
this annotation. Since providers may be created outside the scope of a
particular request, only deployment-specific properties may be available
from injected interfaces at construction time; request-specific
properties are available when a provider method is called. If more than
one public constructor can be used then an implementation MUST use the
one with the most parameters. Choosing amongst constructors with the
same number of parameters is implementation specific, implementations
SHOULD generate a warning about such ambiguity.

[[provider_priorities]]
==== Priorities

Application-supplied providers enable developers to extend and customize
the JAX-RS runtime. Therefore, an application-supplied provider MUST
always be preferred over a pre-packaged one if a single one is required.

Application-supplied providers may be annotated with `@Priority`. If two
or more providers are candidates for a certain task, the one with the
_highest_ priority is chosen: the highest priority is defined to be the
one with the _lowest_ value in this case. That is, `@Priority(1)` is
higher than `@Priority(10)`. If two or more providers are eligible and
have identical priorities, one is chosen in an implementation dependent
manner. The default priority for all application-supplied providers is
`javax.ws.rs.Priorities.USER`.

The general rule about priorities is different for filters and
interceptors since these providers are collected into chains. For more
information see Section <<priorities>>.
